Raazesh Sainudiin - lamaste.org - Courses - About Monte Carlo Methods

[STAT 221: Monte Carlo Methods](README.md)
==========================================

© 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Raazesh Sainudiin. © 2008 2009
2010 2011 Dominic Lee.

[**About this course**](about.md)
------------------------------------

This is a course about **computational statistical experiments** with
Monte Carlo methods.\
Official Description: This course is about the generation of random
numbers and their uses, including computer simulations to mimic and
contrast random real-world phenomena. It will provide an intuitive and
practical understanding of the basic methods in computational
statistics, and show how to implement statistical algorithms to
manipulate, visualise and comprehend various aspects of real-world data.

\

**Who does computational statistical experiments?**\
 A *statistical experimenter* is a person who conducts a *statistical
experiment*. Roughly, an experiment is an action with an empirically
observable outcome (data) that cannot necessarily be predicted with
certainty (in the sense that a repetition of the experiment may result
in a different outcome). An experimenter attempts to learn about a
phenomenon through the outcome of an experiment. An experimenter is
often a decision-maker, scientist or engineer.\
\
 Recent technological advances are facilitating computationally
intensive statistical experiments based on possibly massive amounts of
empirical observations, in a manner that was not viable a decade ago.
Hence, a successful decision-maker, scientist or engineer in most
specialisations today is a **computational statistical experimenter**.
Now hear [Chief Economist at Google talk about statistics being the
dream job for 2010s](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D4FQsYTbLoI). \
\
 A computational statistical experimenter has to *tell a machine what to
do* with the data, i.e. *program the machine*. In addition, statistical
experimenters use a mathematically formal way of thinking about their
experiments. They use set theory, probability theory and other branches
of pure and applied mathematics through established statistical theory
to reach their administrative, scientific and engineering decisions from
their data.

\

This course is designed to help you take the first steps along this
path.

\

**What is Sage and why are we using it?**\
 We will be using [Sage](http://www.sagemath.org/) for our *hands-on*
work in this course. Sage is a free
[open-source](http://hg.sagemath.org/) mathematics software system
licensed under the GPL. Sage can be used to study mathematics and
statistics, including algebra, calculus, elementary to very advanced
number theory, cryptography, commutative algebra, group theory,
combinatorics, graph theory, exact linear algebra, optimization,
interactive data visualization, randomized or Monte Carlo algorithms,
scientific and statistical computing and much more. It combines [various
software packages](http://www.sagemath.org/links-components.html) into
an integrative learning, teaching and research experience that is [well
suited](http://www.sagemath.org/library/stories.html) for novice as well
as professional researchers.\
\
 Sage is a set of software libraries built on top of
[Python](http://www.python.org/), a widely used general purpose
programming language. Sage greatly enhance Python's already
mathematically friendly nature. It is one of the languages used at
Google, US National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA), US Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Industrial Light and Magic, YouTube, and
other leading entities in industry and public sectors ([read
more...](http://www.python.org/about/quotes/)). Scientists, engineers,
and mathematicians often find it well suited for their work. Obtain a
more thorough rationale for Sage from [Why
Sage?](http://www.sagemath.org/library/why.html) and [Success Stories,
Testimonials and News
Articles](http://www.sagemath.org/library/stories.html). Jump start your
motivation by taking a [Sage Feature
Tour](http://www.sagemath.org/tour.html) right now!

\
\
 \

**Expected Learning Outcomes**\
 The course assumes very little and starts from scratch. The course has
three contact hours per week. Lectures and computer labs are fully
intertwined in this course. You are expected to spend 4 to 6 hours each
week to keep up with the material (as per 200 level course requirements
in Maths and Stats Department). The course will give you skills to think
from first principles to become an independent 'computational
statistical experimenter'. You will learn to program each concept you
learn in python, a popular programming language via the Department's
remotely accessible Sage Notebook Server. No prior programming knowledge
is assumed.

\

CC: This work (all of its contents) is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 New Zealand License.
